<23r>
Stoake. July 13th. 1672.

Sir

I think I told you that I had altered my resolution of printing my Dioptrick Lectures. And for the exercise about Infinite series I am not yet resolved, not knowing when I shall proceed to finish it. I will inquire of some of our Booksellers whether they will purchase Mr Pitts his copy of Kinckhuysen & if not I will send it you. In the meane while I would know whether Mr Pitts thinks it will be more advantageous to print the Author without alteration, or to insert those notes which you formerly saw, that I may according send them with the Copy or detain them. Mr Gregorys Problem of finding the solidity of the second segments of a Sphere & yours of finding the surfaces of inclined round solids may be solved divers ways by infinite series, as I find by considering them in generall, but I foresee the calculations are intricate & unpleasant which has made me neglect them, not thinking them worth transmitting to you. If I ever applyed Gunters Sector to the resolving of affected æquations it hath now slipt out of my memory. Possibly it might be Gunters line which being set upon 3 or 4 severall rulers is of ready use for finding the 2 or 3 first figures of any affected æquatio{n} but there is no difficulty in the invention. And if it be the same which you meane, you may command it. The way of resolving æquations of 5 or 6 dimensions, by a locus linearis was I beleive by the intersection of that & a Conick Section, something after the manner that Des-Cartes hath <23v> done it, but more conveniently in my opinion, because the same locus linearis once described will serve for the resolving of all Equations of those dimensions. And as I remember the calculations to that intent are shorter & lesse intricate. I am at present in Northampton shire whither your letter was sent to me from Cambridge: But hope within 8 or 9 days to be at Cambridge to receive what you may send thither if you shall have occasion to write to

Your humble & much
obliged Servant

Newton.

There are three more of Mr Kersies Bookes of Algebra desired in Cambridg for which at present you may subscribe my name.

<23av>
These

To Mr John Collins at
Mr William Austins house
over against the Adam & Eve in Petty France in
Westminster.
London.
2
