# NATP00002 part 1/12: Hypothesis explaining the properties of light (1675)

<247>
December 9. There was produced a manuscript of Mr. NEWTON, touching his theory of light and colors, containing partly an hypothesis to explain the properties of light discoursed of by him in his former papers, partly the principal phænomena of the various colours exhibited by thin plates or bubbles, esteemed by him to be of a more difficult consideration; yet to depend also on the said properties of light.

Of the hypothesis only the first part was read, giving an account of refraction, reflection, transparency, and opacity; the second part explaining colours being referred to the next meeting.

The first was as followsh :

Sir,

I have sent you the papers I mentioned, by JOHN STILES. Upon reviewing them, I find some things so obscure, as might have deserved a further explication by schemes; and some other things, I guess, will not be new to you, though almost all was new to me when I wrote them. But as they are, I hope you will accept of them, though not worth the ample thanks you sent. I remember, in some discourse with Mr. HOOKE, I happened to say, that I thought light was reflected, not by the parts of glass, water, air, or other sensible bodies; but by the same confine or superficies of the æthereal mediums, which refracts it, the rays finding some difficulty to get through it in passing out of the denser into the rarer medium, and a greater difficulty in passing out of the rarer into the denser; and so being either refracted or reflected by that superficies, as the circumstances they happened to be in at their incidence make them able or unable to get through it. And, for confirmation of this, I said further, that I thought the reflection of light, as its tending out of glass into air, would not be diminished or weakened by drawing away the air in an air-pump, as it ought to be, if they were the parts of air that reflected: and added, that I had not tried this experiment, but though he was not unacquainted with notions of this kind. To which he replied, that the notion was not new, and he would the first opportunity try the experiment I propounded. But upon reviewing the papers I send you, I found it there set down for tried; which makes me recollect, that about the time I was writing these papers, I had occasionally observed in an air-pump here at Christ's College, that I could not perceive the reflection of the inside of the glass diminished in drawing out the air. This I thought fit to mention, least my former forgetfulness, through having long laid aside my thoughts on these things, should make me seem to have set down for certain what I never tried.

<248>
Sir, I had formerly purposed never to write any hypothesis of light and colours, fearing it might be a means to engage me in vain disputes: but I hope a declared resolution to answer nothing, that looks like a controversy, unless possibly at my own time upon some by-occasion, may defend me from that fear. And therefore considering, that such an hypothesis would much illustrate the papers I promised to send you; and having a little time this last week to spare, I have not scrupled to describe one, so far as I could on a sudden recollect my thoughts about it; not concerning myself, whether it shall be thought probable or improbable, so it do but render the papers I send you, and others sent formerly, more intelligible. You may see, by the scratching and interlining, it was done in haste; and I have not had time to get it transcribed, which makes me say I reserve a liberty of adding it; and desire, that you would return those and the other papers when you have done with them. I doubt there is too much to be read at one time, but you will soon know how to order that. At the end of the hypothesis you will see a paragraph to be inserted as is there directed: I should have added another or two, but I had not time, but such as it is, I hope you will accept it.

Sir, I am, &c.

Is. NEWTON.

An Hypothesis explaining the Properties of Light, discoursed of in my several Papers.

Sir,

In my answer to Mr. HOOKE, you may remember, I had occasion to say something of hypotheses, where I gave a reason, why all allowable hypotheses in their genuine constitution should be conformable to my theories; and said of Mr. HOOKE'S hypothesis, that I took the most free and natural application of it to phænomena to be thisi : that the agitated parts of bodies, according to their several sizes, figure, and motions, do excite vibrations in the æther of various depths or bignesses, which being promiscuously propagated through that medium to our eyes, effect in us a sensation of light of a white colour; but, if by any means those of unequal bignesses be separated from one another, the largest beget a sensation of a red colour; the least, or shortest, of a deep violet; and the intermediate ones, of intermediate colours: much after the manner that bodies, according to their several sizes, shapes, and motions, excite vibrations in the air of various bignesses, which, according to those bignesses, make several tones in sound, &c. I was glad to understand, as I apprehend, from Mr. HOOKE'S discourse at my last being at one of your assemblies, that he had changed his former notion of all colours being compounded of only two original ones, made by the two sides of an oblique pulse; and accommodated his hypothesis to this my suggestion of colours, like sounds, being various, according to the various bigness of the pulses. For this I take to be a more plausible hypothesis than any other described by former authors, because I see not how the colours of thin transparent plates or skins can be handsomely explained, without having recourse to æthereal pulses: but yet I <249> like another hypothesis better, which I had occasion to hint something of in the same letter in these wordsk :

The hypothesis of light's being a body, had I propounded it, has a much greater affinity with the objector's own hypothesis, than he seems to be aware of; the vibrations of the æther being as useful and necessary in this as in his. For, assuming the rays of light to be small bodies emitted every way from shining substances, those, when they impinge on any refracting or reflecting superficies, must as necessarily excite vibrations in the æther, as stones do in water when thrown into it. And, supposing these vibrations to be of several depths or thicknesses, accordingly as they are excited by the said corpuscular rays of various sizes and velocities; of what use they will be for explicating the manner of reflexion and refraction; the production of heat by the sun-beams; the emission of light from burning, putrifying, or other substances, whose parts are vehemently agitated; the phænomena of thin transparent plates, and bubbles, and of all natural bodies; the manner of vision, and the difference of colours; as also their harmony and discord; I shall leave to their consideration, who may think it worth their endeavour to apply this hypothesis to the solution of phænomena.

Were I to assume an hypothesis, it should be this, if propounded more generally, so as not to determine what light is, farther than that it is something or other capable of exciting vibrations in the æther: for thus it will become so genreal and comprehensive of other hypotheses, as to leave little room for new ones to be invented. And therefore, because I have observed the heads of some great virtuosos to run much upon hypotheses, as if my discourses wanted an hypothesis to explain them by, and found, that some, when I could not make them take my meaning, when I spake of the nature of light and colours abstractedly, have readily apprehended it, when I illustrated my discourse by an hypothesis; for this reason I have here thought fit to send you a description of the circumstances of this hypothesis as much tending to the illustration of the papers I herewith send you. And though I shall not assume either this or any other hypothesis, not thinking it necessary to concern myself, whether the properties of light, discovered by me, be explained by this, or Mr. HOOKE'S, or any other hypothesis capable of explaining them; yet while I am describing this, I shall sometimes, to avoid circumlocution, and to represent it more conveniently, speak of it, as if I assumed it, and propounded it to be believed. This I though fit to express, that no man may confound this with my other discourses, or measure the certainty of one by the other, or think me obliged to answer objections against this script: for I desire to decline being involved in such troublesome and insignificant disputes.

But to proceed to the hypothesis: First, it is to be supposed therein, that there is an æthereal medium much of the same constitution with air, but far rarer, subtler, and more strongly elastic. Of the existence of this medium the motion of a pendulum in a glass exhausted of air almost as quickly as in <250> the open air, is no inconsiderable argument. But it is not to be supposed, that this medium is one uniform matter, but compounded, partly of the main phlegmatic body of æther, partly of other various æthereal spirits, much after the manner, that air is compounded of the phlegmatic body of air intermixed with various vapours and exhalations: for the electric and magnetic effluvia, and gravitating principle, seem to argue such variety. Perhaps the whole frame of nature may be nothing but various contextures of some certain æthereal spirits, or vapours, condensed as it were by precipitation, much after the manner, that vapours are condensed into water, or exhalations into grosser substances, though not so easliy condensible; and after condensation wrought into various forms; at first by the immediate hand of the Creator; and ever since by the power of nature; which, by virtue of the command, increase and multiply, become a complete imitator of the copies set her by the protoplast. Thus perhaps may all things be originated from æther.

At least, the elastic effluvia seem to instruct us, that there is something of an æthereal nature condensed in bodies. I have sometimes laid upon a table a round piece of glass about two inches broad set in a brass ring, so that the glass might be about one eighth or one sixth of an inch from the table, and the air between them inclosed on all sides by the ring, after the manner as if I had whelmed a little sieve upon the table; and then rubbing a pretty while the glass briskly with some rough and raking stuff, till some very little fragments of very thin paper, laid on the table under the glass, began to be attracted and move nimbly to and fro; after I had done rubbing the glass, the papers would continue a pretty while in various motions; sometimes leaping up to the glass and resting there a while; then leaping down and resting there; then leaping up, and perhaps down and up again, and this sometimes in lines seeming perpendicular to the table; sometimes in oblique ones; sometimes also they would leap up in one arch and down in another, divers times together, without sensibly resting between; sometimes skip in a bow from one part of the glass to another without touching the table, and sometimes hang by a corner, and turn often about very nimbly, as if they had been carried about in the midst of a whirlwind, and be otherwise variously moved, every paper with a diverse motion. And upon sliding my finger on the upper side of the glass, though neither the glass, nor inclosed air below, were moved thereby, yet would the papers, as they hung under the glass, receive some new motion, inclining this way or that way, accordingly as I moved my finger. Now, whence all these irregular motions should spring, I cannot imagine, unless from some kind of subtil matter lying condensed in the glass, and rarefied by rubbing, as water is rarefied into vapour by heat, and in that refraction diffused through the space round the glass to a great distance, and made to move and circulate variously, and accordingly to actuate the papers till it return into the glass again, and be recondensed there. And as this condensed matter by rarefaction into an æthereal wind (for by its easy penetrating and circulating through glass I esteem it æthereal) may cause these odd motions, and by condensing again may cause electrical attraction with its returning to the glass to succeed in the place of what is there continually recondensed; so may the gravitating attraction of the <251> earth be caused by the continual condensation of some other such like æthereal spirit, not of the main body of phlegmatic æther, but of something very thinly and subtilly difused through it, perhaps of an unctuous or gummy, tenacious, and springy nature, and bearing much the same relation to æther, which the vital aereal spirit, requisite for the conservation of flame and vital motions, does to air. For, if such an æthereal spirit may be condensed in fermenting or burning bodies, or otherwise coagulated in the pores of the earth and water into some kind of humid active matter, for the continual uses of nature, adhering to the sides of those pores, after the manner that vapours condense on the sides of a vessel; the vast body of the earth, which may be every where to the very center in perpetual working, may continually condense so much of this spirit, as to cause it from above to descend with great celerity for a supply; in which descent it may bear down with it the bodies it pervades with force proportional to the superficies of all their parts it acts upon; nature making a circulation by the slow ascent of as much matter out of the bowels of the earth in an aereal form, which, for a time, constitues the atmosphere; but being continually buoyed up by the new air; exhalations and vapours rising underneath, at length (some parts of the vapours, which return in rain, excepted) vanishes again into the æthereal spaces, and there perhaps in time relents, and is attenuated into its first principle: for nature is a perpetual worker, generating fluids out of solids, and solids out of fluids, fixed things out of volatile, and volatile out of fixed, subtil out of gross and gross out of subtil; some things to ascend, and make the upper terrestrial juices, rivers, and the atmosphere; and by consequence, others to descend for a requital to the former. And, as the earth, so perhaps may the sun imbibe this spirit copiously, to conserve his shining, and keep the planets from receding further from him. And they, that will, may also suppose, that this spirit affords or carries with it thither the solary fewel and material principle of light: and that the vast æthereal spaces between us and the stars are for a sufficient repository for this food of the sun and planets. But this of the constitution of æthereal natures by the by.